Nov news new branch (#723)
pathoplexus/pathoplexus: monorepo/website/src/pages/news/2025-11-17-november-update.mdx

As well as directly uploaded sequences, we also ingest data from INSDC databases, ensuring users can access all openly available sequences via Pathoplexus. 

#### A note on RSV

To help ensure we could capture all available RSV sequences, we recently updated our RSV ‘minimizer’ (used to classify sequences). Previously we were ingesting from taxon ID 11245, which is annotated as "human respiratory syncytial virus", but we noticed that some human sequences have instead been annotated with taxon ID 12814 ("respiratory syncytial virus"), which is currently listed in NCBI Taxonomy as a child of "Bovine orthopneumovirus" (taxon ID 11246). By updating the classifier we were able to ingest from the full set of sequences under Orthopneumovirus (taxon ID 1868215), whilst filtering out bovine sequences based on sequence similarity . Using the updated classifier to ingest from the higher level identified an additional 2,325 RSV-A, 1,335 RSV-B, and 879 bovine RSV sequences - allowing us to add the RSV-A and RSV-B sequences to the dataset within Pathoplexus. 

## Community Highlights

> Pathoplexus is dedicated to serving the pathogen community, and as such we aim to be active participants in initiatives that help us connect with and better understand the needs of our users (and potential users!). Thus, we’re exceptionally pleased to announce that we are now an [**institutional member of the International Pathogen Surveillance Network (IPSN)**](https://www.who.int/initiatives/international-pathogen-surveillance-network/membership), convened by the WHO. We are excited to have the opportunity to connect with pathogen and public health researchers and workers worldwide and strengthen our ties with global partners in pathogen data infrastructure. 

Reviewer: I've never heard the expression "convened by the WHO" before - this is correct?

In addition, we’re grateful to the active pathogen communities for their work in improving standards and datasets. In particular, recently the mpox and RSV communities have been particularly active:

- [Newly designated mpox lineages](ttps://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade_data/tree/2025-09-09--12-13-13Z/data/nextstrain/mpox) are now annotated on Pathoplexus following community review 

- [New RSV-B lineages](https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade_data/tree/2025-09-09--12-13-13Z/data/nextstrain/rsv) have also been integrated, improving consistency and downstream analyses across datasets. 

#### Citations

> Additionally, we’d like to remind all those who use data from Pathoplexus, that we do require [use of Pathoplexus SeqSets and DOIs](https://pathoplexus.org/docs/how-to/generate-seqset) for citations in publications and preprints (this is especially critical when making use of [Restricted-Use Data](https://pathoplexus.org/about/terms-of-use/data-use-terms#42-restricted-data-use) in any form). These DOIs should be cited as references to enable tracking; a citation-style reference can be generated using the ‘Export’ button at the top of the page. 

Reviewer 2: It is required to use a SeqSet in some cases: https://pathoplexus.org/about/terms-of-use/data-use-terms#422-publications-and-preprints :)

> Users utilizing data from Pathoplexus in publications and preprints must create a SeqSet (see section [4.4](https://pathoplexus.org/about/terms-of-use/data-use-terms#44-how-to-create-a-seqset))

> Additionally, we’d like to remind all those who use data from Pathoplexus, that we do require [use of Pathoplexus SeqSets and DOIs](https://pathoplexus.org/docs/how-to/generate-seqset) for citations in publications and preprints (this is especially critical when making use of [Restricted-Use Data](https://pathoplexus.org/about/terms-of-use/data-use-terms#42-restricted-data-use) in any form). These DOIs should be cited as references to enable tracking; a citation-style reference can be generated using the ‘Export’ button at the top of the page. 

Reviewer: Oh I was not aware - we really need to make the seqSets page better then!

---
layout: ../../layouts/NewsLayout.astro
title: "Pathoplexus November Update"
---

<div>
    <a href="/news">News</a> > <b>Pathoplexus November Update</b>
</div>

# Pathoplexus November Update

*By the Pathoplexus Team - 17 November 2025*

> Since our last update in August, Pathoplexus has continued to grow - both in data and in community. Over the past two months, thousands of new sequences have been shared, several new features have gone live, and new members have joined our global community! In addition, we’re excited to be part of the upcoming joint PHA4GE & IPSN Conference in just a few weeks - read on to find out more!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since our last update in August, Pathoplexus has continued to grow - both in data and in community. Over the past two months, thousands of new sequences have been shared, several new features have gone live, and new members have joined our global community! In addition, we were excited to be part of the joint PHA4GE & IPSN Conference - read on to find out more!
```

> Since our last update in August, Pathoplexus has continued to grow - both in data and in community. Over the past two months, thousands of new sequences have been shared, several new technical features have gone live, and new members have joined our global community! In addition, we’re excited to be part of the upcoming joint PHA4GE & IPSN Conference in just a few weeks - read on to find out more!

Author: Yeah good catch

> Since our last update in August, Pathoplexus has continued to grow - both in data and in community. Over the past two months, thousands of new sequences have been shared, several new technical features have gone live, and new members have joined our global community! In addition, we’re excited to be part of the upcoming joint PHA4GE & IPSN Conference in just a few weeks - read on to find out more!

Reviewer: resolved below :-)

As well as directly uploaded sequences, we also ingest data from INSDC databases, ensuring users can access all openly available sequences via Pathoplexus. 

#### A note on RSV

To help ensure we could capture all available RSV sequences, we recently updated our RSV ‘minimizer’ (used to classify sequences). Previously we were ingesting from taxon ID 11250, which is annotated as "human respiratory syncytial virus", but we noticed that some human sequences have instead been annotated with taxon ID 12814 ("respiratory syncytial virus"), which is currently listed in NCBI Taxonomy as a child of "Bovine orthopneumovirus" (taxon ID 11246). By updating the classifier we were able to ingest from the full set of sequences under Orthopneumovirus ([taxon ID 1868215](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?command=show&mode=node&id=1868215&lvl=3)), whilst filtering out bovine sequences based on sequence similarity . Using the updated classifier to ingest from the higher level identified an additional 2,325 RSV-A, 1,335 RSV-B, and 879 bovine RSV sequences - allowing us to add the RSV-A and RSV-B sequences to the dataset within Pathoplexus. 

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should move this down so as not to lose people with a technicality.

## Community Highlights

Pathoplexus is dedicated to serving the pathogen community, and as such we aim to be active participants in initiatives that help us connect with and better understand the needs of our users (and potential users!). Thus, we’re exceptionally pleased to announce that we are now an [**institutional member of the International Pathogen Surveillance Network (IPSN)**](https://www.who.int/initiatives/international-pathogen-surveillance-network/membership), convened by the WHO. We are excited to have the opportunity to connect with pathogen and public health researchers and workers worldwide and strengthen our ties with global partners in pathogen data infrastructure. 

> In addition, we’re grateful to the active pathogen communities for their work in improving standards and datasets. In particular, recently the mpox and RSV communities have been particularly active:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, we’re grateful to the active pathogen communities for their work in improving standards and datasets. Recently the mpox and RSV communities have been particularly active:
```

double particular

- [Newly designated mpox lineages](https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade_data/tree/2025-09-09--12-13-13Z/data/nextstrain/mpox) are now annotated on Pathoplexus following community review 

- [New RSV-B lineages](https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade_data/tree/2025-09-09--12-13-13Z/data/nextstrain/rsv) have also been integrated, improving consistency and downstream analyses across datasets. 

#### Citations

> Additionally, we’d like to remind all those who use data from Pathoplexus, that we do require [use of Pathoplexus SeqSets and DOIs](https://pathoplexus.org/docs/how-to/generate-seqset) for citations in publications and preprints (this is especially critical when making use of [Restricted-Use Data](https://pathoplexus.org/about/terms-of-use/data-use-terms#42-restricted-data-use) in any form). These DOIs should be cited as references to enable tracking; a citation-style reference can be generated using the ‘Export’ button at the top of the page. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, we’d like to remind all those who use data from Pathoplexus that we do require [use of Pathoplexus SeqSets and DOIs](https://pathoplexus.org/docs/how-to/generate-seqset) for citations in publications and preprints (this is especially critical when making use of [Restricted-Use Data](https://pathoplexus.org/about/terms-of-use/data-use-terms#42-restricted-data-use) in any form). These DOIs should be cited as references to enable tracking; a citation-style reference can be generated using the ‘Export’ button at the top of the page. 
```

Not only does proper citation ensure submitters receive full credit, but it also helps trace data provenance and use through time. Soon, this will allow submitters to see the total contribution their sequences have made towards work outside their own publications!

![Image showing the location of the links to generate and cite a DOI on the SeqSet page](/gifs/news/2025-11-27-november-update/seqset_combined.png)

## Technical Improvements

A series of backend and frontend enhancements have rolled out this quarter to make Pathoplexus faster, clearer, and more user-friendly:

### Submission:

- Accented characters are [now supported](https://github.com/loculus-project/loculus/commit/ea932f3c2065eb59bbabb0141577cd99f1d42d5c) in author names. These will be displayed across Pathoplexus, though non-accented characters are submitted to INSDC which currently requires author names to be in ASCII.

> - For users uploading measles sequences, we have a new field `means2id` that can be used to link sequences to the MeaNS2 database, if the sequences are also uploaded there, aiding with de-duplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For users uploading measles sequences, we have a new field `means2id` that can be used to link sequences to the [MeaNS2 database](https://who-gmrln.org/means2), if the sequences are also uploaded there, aiding with de-duplication.
```

- When submitting data to Pathoplexus as ‘Open,’ we now have a very clear pop-up to prevent submission without accidentally forgetting to change the Data Use Terms
![Image showing the pop-up that now appears when you submit data as Open, reminding users that once they submit data as 'Open' it cannot be changed to Restricted-Use](/gifs/news/2025-11-27-november-update/openData_release_alert.png)

### Display:

- Improved banners on Restricted-Use Data sequence pages now provide more detail about usage terms 
![Image showing the new Restricted-Use banner (in yellow) that appears on every Restricted-Use sequence page](/gifs/news/2025-11-27-november-update/restricted-use-banner.png)

> - Group pages now show uploaded sequences (for logged-in users), giving users a clearer view of the data that’s been shared by a particular group - check it out on the [Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale Group Page](https://pathoplexus.org/group/232) *(you’ll need to log-in first!)*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Group pages now show counts of released sequences (for logged-in users), giving users a clearer view of the data that’s been shared by a particular group - check it out on the [Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale Group Page](https://pathoplexus.org/group/232) *(you’ll need to log-in first!)*
```

![Image showing the Tools page for RSV-A, which lists GenSpectrum, Nextstrain, and Pathogen Sequence Counts and Maps as resources making use of Pathoplexus data for RSV-A via the API](/gifs/news/2025-11-27-november-update/externalTools.jpg)

## Talks, Tutorials, and Media

#### Past talks

Pathoplexus and Loculus have been on the road - or rather, on the conference circuit!

- The [Binfie Podcast](https://microbinfie.github.io/) released a two-part feature on Pathoplexus and Loculus - covering their design philosophy, technical underpinnings, and vision for open pathogen data. Have a listen for yourself: [Part I](https://soundcloud.com/microbinfie/micro-binfie-pathoplexus-part/s-rnGclEiarcS), [Part II](https://soundcloud.com/microbinfie/144-micro-binfie-pathoplexus-part-2/s-IvdaQga0ibJ) 

- The Loculus tutorial and talk at [BC2](https://www.bc2.ch/) by Chaoran Chen and Anna Parker drew strong engagement, with many participants expressing interest in federated deployments.

> 

Reviewer 4: Yea we don't have a good way to surface Loculus news otherwise and we have done this in the past. I think it's fine.

- Theo Sanderson presented Pathoplexus at [IMMEM](https://www.escmid.org/congress-events/immem-xiv/), highlighting how open-source infrastructure and transparent governance can power equitable data sharing.

> - Chaoran Chen presented Pathoplexus and Loculus at the CERI Summer Scientific Seminar at Stellenbosch University.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Chaoran Chen presented Pathoplexus at the CERI Summer Scientific Seminar at Stellenbosch University.
```

> - Pathoplexus featured heavily at the [PHA4GE-Conference](https://pha4ge.org/conferences/pha4ge-conference-2025/) pre-conference workshop and at the conferences itself! The well-attended workshop featured a diverse group getting to grips with how to create accounts, search Pathoplexus, and upload data - and was led by Arthur Shem Kasambula, Stephen Kanyerezi, Patricia Nabisubi (Uganda) and Emma Hodcroft and Chaoran Chen (Switzerland). The talk focused on exploring how open data ecosystems can serve public health. Here’s a few photos of the coordinators and workshop in action!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Pathoplexus featured heavily at the [PHA4GE-Conference](https://pha4ge.org/conferences/pha4ge-conference-2025/) pre-conference workshop and at the conferences itself! The well-attended workshop featured a diverse group getting to grips with how to create accounts, search Pathoplexus, and upload data - and was led by Arthur Shem Kasambula, Stephen Kanyerezi, Patricia Nabisubi (Uganda) and Emma Hodcroft and Chaoran Chen (Switzerland). The talk focused on exploring how open data ecosystems can serve public health. Here are a few photos of the coordinators and workshop in action!
```

![A collage image, showing first a photo of the workshop coordinators Arthur, Stephen, Patricia, Emma, and Chaoran next to a PHA4GE-Workshop poster. Then showing Stephen helping a participant, and then Chaoran helping a participant](/gifs/news/2025-11-27-november-update/workshop-photo.jpg)

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Cornelius Roemer presented Pathoplexus at the 2025 ENA facilities on November 7.
```
